# haskell $

i was on the train with joão and i was delighted to see my old friend $. i also miss composite (.) but $ is really the coolest shortcut haskell gives a developer. so what is $?

it’s defined as:

``` haskell
f ($) x = f x
```
what does it does?

``` haskell
Prelude> let f x = map (succ) $ filter ( < 5 ) x
Prelude> f [4,5,7]
[5]
Prelude> let f  = zipWith ($)
Prelude> f [succ,id] [5,4]
[6,4]
```

in the first example we filter a list for numbers that are inferior to five and then we apply succ function to it. that is, we add one. without $ we would have:

``` haskell
Prelude> let f x = map (succ) (filter ( < 5 ) x)
Prelude> f [4,5,7]
[5]
```

so we got the parenthesis off and that always great to help make the code more readable. at least i simply love this symbol. the first sample is quite more complex. first off all because it is in point-free/point-less notation. zipwith is a function that receives two lists and applies then function provided pair by pair. like if i want to add [1,2,3] and [3,2,1] i can:

``` haskell
Prelude> zipWith (+) [1,2,3] [3,2,1]
[4,4,4]
```

ain’t it cool? so in this function we simply apply function that goes in the first list (id and succ) to the numbers in the second. looks easy like this doesn’t it? ;) if it doesn’t just to read it and digest it and you’ll figure it out easily

let code the same samples in ruby. unfortunately zipwith (should i commit it? :p) doesn’t exist in ruby i’ll have to work with another sample using plain zip (it’s the same as zipwith (\a b -> [a]++[b]))

``` ruby
irb(main):001:0> [1,2,3].zip([3,2,1])
=> [[1, 3], [2, 2], [3, 1]]
```

well ruby handles this pretty well without $. we just need to do:

``` ruby
irb(main):002:0> [1,2,3].zip [3,2,1]
```

because it’s object oriented this kind of issues don’t exist in ruby. there are no expressions with large number of parenthesis as well. despite this i must agree that the haskell version is far more readable than the ruby one:

``` ruby
irb(main):003:0> [4,5,7].select {
  |i| i < 5
}.map { |i| i.succ }
=> [5]
```

but i still miss $.i miss coding in haskell. it’s just plain fun.
i hope that i have helped you see why languages like haskell and scheme do matter, and others like python and ruby can be both useful and fun to work with